README.md, before:

## sPRUNED
#### A Bitcoin lightweight pseudonode with RPC that can fetch any block or transaction

[![travis](https://travis-ci.org/gdassori/spruned.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/gdassori/spruned)
[![coveralls](https://coveralls.io/repos/github/gdassori/spruned/badge.svg)](https://coveralls.io/github/gdassori/spruned)
[![pypi](https://badge.fury.io/py/spruned.svg)](https://pypi.org/project/spruned/)
#### What's this?

spruned is a bitcoin pseudonode for lightweight systems. <br />
__256mb ram & 500mb hdd__ should be fairly enough to keep it up & running.
<br />

Supports both Bitcoin Mainnet and Testnet<br />
It's proven to work on a Raspberry Zero, along with CLightning, it simply provides an interface for bitcoin-cli. <br />
<br />

#### How it works?

spruned downloads and store the bitcoin blocks on demand, when you need them, directly from the __peer to peer bitcoin network__.<br/>
<br />there's a "bootstrap" functionality, to keep the last ~50 (default settings) blocks on the local storage, because 
fetch blocks may require also up to 10 seconds with slow connections, and this "bootstrap mode" reduces latencies on usage.<br />

You can use bitcoin-cli, or any other RPC client, as if you had bitcoind up & running.<br />

For the transactions related APIs and utxo tracking, spruned uses the __electrum network__.

#### Dependencies

spruned works with Python >= 3.5.2. Right now it should work only on Linux systems.<br />
<br />
It make intensive usage of connectrum, pybitcointools and pycoinnet libraries. Thanks to mantainers & contributors! <br />
Especially at this stage of development (but it would be better always), it is recommended to use virtualenv to run spruned.


#### Usage
Developers: I hope code is self explaining enough, if you're familiar with asyncio.<br />

Everyone else: You can get inspiration on how to install spruned taking a look at setup.sh but, if you're lucky enough, setup.sh itself will 
create a virtual environment and install spruned into it. 

#### Installation from pip

```console
$ sudo apt-get install libleveldb-dev python3-dev git virtualenv
$ virtualenv -p python3.5 venv
$ . venv/bin/activate
$ pip install spruned
```

__NOTE__: pip will try to install a set of dependencies from github. Check the requirements.txt file. 
To avoid conflicts, use a dedicated virtual environment.

#### Installation from github:

```console
$ cd ~/src
$ sudo apt-get install libleveldb-dev python3-dev git virtualenv
$ git clone https://github.com/gdassori/spruned.git
$ cd spruned
$ virtualenv -p python3.5 venv
$ . venv/bin/activate
$ pip install -r requirements.txt
```

### Spruned usage:


spruned options:
```console

$ spruned

usage: spruned.py [-h] [--rpcuser RPCUSER] [--rpcpassword RPCPASSWORD]
                  [--rpcport RPCPORT] [--rpcbind RPCBIND] [--datadir DATADIR]
                  [--daemon] [--keep-blocks KEEP_BLOCKS]
                  [--network {bitcoin.mainnet,bitcoin.testnet}] [--debug]
                  [--cache-size CACHE_SIZE]

A Bitcoin Lightweight Pseudonode

optional arguments:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  --rpcuser RPCUSER     Username for JSON-RPC connections (default: rpcuser)
  --rpcpassword RPCPASSWORD
                        Password for JSON-RPC connections (default:
                        rpcpassword)
  --rpcport RPCPORT     Listen for JSON-RPC connections on <port> (default:
                        8332 or testnet: 18332) (default: 8332)
  --rpcbind RPCBIND     Bind to given address to listen for JSON-RPC
                        connections. (default: 127.0.0.1)
  --datadir DATADIR     Specify data directory (default: /home/guido/.spruned)
  --daemon              Run in the background as a daemon and accept commands
                        (default: False)
  --keep-blocks KEEP_BLOCKS
  --network {bitcoin.mainnet,bitcoin.testnet}
  --debug               Enable debug mode (default: False)
  --cache-size CACHE_SIZE
                        Cache size (in megabytes) (default: 50)
```

And, once you run spruned:

```console
$ tail -f ~/.spruned/spruned.log # to see what's going on!
```

see the list of available commands:

```console
$ bitcoin-cli help

== spruned 0.0.1a5, emulating bitcoind 0.16 ==

== Blockchain ==
getbestblockhash
getblock "blockhash" ( verbosity ) 
getblockchaininfo
getblockcount
getblockhash height
getblockheader "hash" ( verbose )
gettxout "txid" n ( include_mempool )

== Rawtransactions ==
getrawtransaction "txid" ( verbose )
sendrawtransaction "hexstring" ( allowhighfees )

== Util ==
estimatefee nblocks
estimatesmartfee conf_target ("estimate_mode")


```

or check the status*:

```console
$ bitcoin-cli getblockchaininfo
{
  "mediantime": 1523387051,
  "blocks": 517579,
  "headers": 517579,
  "verificationprogress": 100,
  "chain": "main",
  "chainwork": null,
  "difficulty": null,
  "bestblockhash": "00000000000000000018e502dec1f93d32521674019a45d7d095cbd390279dff",
  "warning": "spruned v0.0.1. emulating bitcoind v0.16",
  "pruned": false
}
```

Download a block:
```console
$ bitcoin-cli getblock `bitcoin-cli getblockhash 1`
{
  "bits": 486604799,
  "mediantime": 1231469665,
  "nextblockhash": "000000006a625f06636b8bb6ac7b960a8d03705d1ace08b1a19da3fdcc99ddbd",
  "tx": [
    "0e3e2357e806b6cdb1f70b54c3a3a17b6714ee1f0e68bebb44a74b1efd512098"
  ],
  "previousblockhash": "000000000019d6689c085ae165831e934ff763ae46a2a6c172b3f1b60a8ce26f",
  "version": 1,
  "chainwork": "Not Implemented Yet",
  "nonce": 2573394689,
  "time": 1231469665,
  "height": 1,
  "hash": "00000000839a8e6886ab5951d76f411475428afc90947ee320161bbf18eb6048",
  "versionHex": "Not Implemented Yet",
  "merkleroot": "0e3e2357e806b6cdb1f70b54c3a3a17b6714ee1f0e68bebb44a74b1efd512098",
  "difficulty": "Not Implemented Yet"
}
```

Or a transaction:
```console
$ bitcoin-cli getrawtransaction 0e3e2357e806b6cdb1f70b54c3a3a17b6714ee1f0e68bebb44a74b1efd512098
01000000010000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000ffffffff0704ffff
001d0104ffffffff0100f2052a0100000043410496b538e853519c726a2c91e61ec11600ae1390813a627c66fb
8be7947be63c52da7589379515d4e0a604f8141781e62294721166bf621e73a82cbf2342c858eeac00000000

```

And, eventually, broadcast one:
```console
$ bitcoin-cli sendrawtransaction 01000000011cee4c0dd7f1a90ae80311c414d48f3a16596e9ea08fa3edfb793734e2b2a100010000006a47304402205a665616085b4f425cccfde5be2113258f3c104c2c53ef918866ada8f02f7caf0220458bdbc220a3f1017b65d9138e5121a9c63decc89550a2e64e914013d26cb93b0121029643906e277eae677134d40356dfb575a2dfbe09a18a1fd7fadfd853715a7242ffffffff0234e3e600000000001976a91410a71790c6bbc2694c74b6fee9a449a11f74123388ac444c5501000000001976a9148c9e0a9029bbce075e2b5aae90010905aa4c64b188ac00000000
489feae0e317b9255031710eadc238bb1ba3009fff0e86b303b0963e34a332b0

```
_* bitcoin-cli is not included_
<br /><br />

#### Emulated APIs as in bitcoind 0.16:
```
- estimatefee
- estimatesmartfee
- getbestblockhash
- getblock [mode 0 and mode 1]
- getblockchaininfo
- getblockcount
- getblockhash
- getblockheader [ verbose \ non verbose ]
- getrawtransaction [ non verbose only ]
- gettxout
- sendrawtransaction
```

#### Work in progress:

```
- getrawtransaction [ verbose ]
- getmempoolinfo
- getrawmempool
```


#### Requirements
- An internet connection
- **less than 500mb of disk space :-)**
- Python >= 3.5.2


#### Limitations

- May reduce privacy: if you have the entire blockchain on your own, you have to tell no one what you're looking for.
- Not fast as a full node: internet download is slower than a read from disk.
- Doesn't relay and partecipate to the network (this may change).
- Very unstable!


#### Future development
 
- Tor support
- Mempool emulation
- Zeromq emulation
- Maintenance web ui


#### Contribute

Help the development of spruned! Report bugs with the issue tracker. If you're a developer, feel free to discuss a PR.

Commit message:

undocument pip installation. for the moment

README.md, after:

## sPRUNED
#### A Bitcoin lightweight pseudonode with RPC that can fetch any block or transaction

[![travis](https://travis-ci.org/gdassori/spruned.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/gdassori/spruned)
[![coveralls](https://coveralls.io/repos/github/gdassori/spruned/badge.svg)](https://coveralls.io/github/gdassori/spruned)
[![pypi](https://badge.fury.io/py/spruned.svg)](https://pypi.org/project/spruned/)
#### What's this?

spruned is a bitcoin pseudonode for lightweight systems. <br />
__256mb ram & 500mb hdd__ should be fairly enough to keep it up & running.
<br />

Supports both Bitcoin Mainnet and Testnet<br />
It's proven to work on a Raspberry Zero, along with CLightning, it simply provides an interface for bitcoin-cli. <br />
<br />

#### How it works?

spruned downloads and store the bitcoin blocks on demand, when you need them, directly from the __peer to peer bitcoin network__.<br/>
<br />there's a "bootstrap" functionality, to keep the last ~50 (default settings) blocks on the local storage, because 
fetch blocks may require also up to 10 seconds with slow connections, and this "bootstrap mode" reduces latencies on usage.<br />

You can use bitcoin-cli, or any other RPC client, as if you had bitcoind up & running.<br />

For the transactions related APIs and utxo tracking, spruned uses the __electrum network__.

#### Dependencies

spruned works with Python >= 3.5.2. Right now it should work only on Linux systems.<br />
<br />
It make intensive usage of connectrum, pybitcointools and pycoinnet libraries. Thanks to mantainers & contributors! <br />
Especially at this stage of development (but it would be better always), it is recommended to use virtualenv to run spruned.


#### Usage
Developers: I hope code is self explaining enough, if you're familiar with asyncio.<br />

Everyone else: You can get inspiration on how to install spruned taking a look at setup.sh but, if you're lucky enough, setup.sh itself will 
create a virtual environment and install spruned into it. 

#### Installation from github:

```console
$ cd ~/src
$ sudo apt-get install libleveldb-dev python3-dev git virtualenv
$ git clone https://github.com/gdassori/spruned.git
$ cd spruned
$ virtualenv -p python3.5 venv
$ . venv/bin/activate
$ pip install -r requirements.txt
$ python setup.py install
```

### Spruned usage:


spruned options:
```console

$ ~/src/spruned/venv/bin/spruned

usage: spruned    [-h] [--rpcuser RPCUSER] [--rpcpassword RPCPASSWORD]
                  [--rpcport RPCPORT] [--rpcbind RPCBIND] [--datadir DATADIR]
                  [--daemon] [--keep-blocks KEEP_BLOCKS]
                  [--network {bitcoin.mainnet,bitcoin.testnet}] [--debug]
                  [--cache-size CACHE_SIZE]

A Bitcoin Lightweight Pseudonode

optional arguments:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  --rpcuser RPCUSER     Username for JSON-RPC connections (default: rpcuser)
  --rpcpassword RPCPASSWORD
                        Password for JSON-RPC connections (default:
                        rpcpassword)
  --rpcport RPCPORT     Listen for JSON-RPC connections on <port> (default:
                        8332 or testnet: 18332) (default: 8332)
  --rpcbind RPCBIND     Bind to given address to listen for JSON-RPC
                        connections. (default: 127.0.0.1)
  --datadir DATADIR     Specify data directory (default: /home/guido/.spruned)
  --daemon              Run in the background as a daemon and accept commands
                        (default: False)
  --keep-blocks KEEP_BLOCKS
  --network {bitcoin.mainnet,bitcoin.testnet}
  --debug               Enable debug mode (default: False)
  --cache-size CACHE_SIZE
                        Cache size (in megabytes) (default: 50)
```

And, once you run spruned:

```console
$ tail -f ~/.spruned/spruned.log # to see what's going on!
```

You'll see it will took about 15 minutes to sync block headers (up to 2 hours on a raspberry pi zero, I'm working on this.)

In sync ? Ok, see the list of available commands:

```console
$ bitcoin-cli help

== spruned 0.0.1a5, emulating bitcoind 0.16 ==

== Blockchain ==
getbestblockhash
getblock "blockhash" ( verbosity ) 
getblockchaininfo
getblockcount
getblockhash height
getblockheader "hash" ( verbose )
gettxout "txid" n ( include_mempool )

== Rawtransactions ==
getrawtransaction "txid" ( verbose )
sendrawtransaction "hexstring" ( allowhighfees )

== Util ==
estimatefee nblocks
estimatesmartfee conf_target ("estimate_mode")

```

or check the status*:

```console
$ bitcoin-cli getblockchaininfo
{
  "mediantime": 1523387051,
  "blocks": 517579,
  "headers": 517579,
  "verificationprogress": 100,
  "chain": "main",
  "chainwork": null,
  "difficulty": null,
  "bestblockhash": "00000000000000000018e502dec1f93d32521674019a45d7d095cbd390279dff",
  "warning": "spruned 0.0.1a7, emulating bitcoind v0.16",
  "pruned": false
}
```

Download a block:
```console
$ bitcoin-cli getblock `bitcoin-cli getblockhash 1`
{
  "bits": 486604799,
  "mediantime": 1231469665,
  "nextblockhash": "000000006a625f06636b8bb6ac7b960a8d03705d1ace08b1a19da3fdcc99ddbd",
  "tx": [
    "0e3e2357e806b6cdb1f70b54c3a3a17b6714ee1f0e68bebb44a74b1efd512098"
  ],
  "previousblockhash": "000000000019d6689c085ae165831e934ff763ae46a2a6c172b3f1b60a8ce26f",
  "version": 1,
  "chainwork": "Not Implemented Yet",
  "nonce": 2573394689,
  "time": 1231469665,
  "height": 1,
  "hash": "00000000839a8e6886ab5951d76f411475428afc90947ee320161bbf18eb6048",
  "versionHex": "Not Implemented Yet",
  "merkleroot": "0e3e2357e806b6cdb1f70b54c3a3a17b6714ee1f0e68bebb44a74b1efd512098",
  "difficulty": "Not Implemented Yet"
}
```

Or a transaction:
```console
$ bitcoin-cli getrawtransaction 0e3e2357e806b6cdb1f70b54c3a3a17b6714ee1f0e68bebb44a74b1efd512098
01000000010000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000ffffffff0704ffff
001d0104ffffffff0100f2052a0100000043410496b538e853519c726a2c91e61ec11600ae1390813a627c66fb
8be7947be63c52da7589379515d4e0a604f8141781e62294721166bf621e73a82cbf2342c858eeac00000000

```

And, eventually, broadcast one:
```console
$ bitcoin-cli sendrawtransaction 01000000011cee4c0dd7f1a90ae80311c414d48f3a16596e9ea08fa3edfb793734e2b2a100010000006a47304402205a665616085b4f425cccfde5be2113258f3c104c2c53ef918866ada8f02f7caf0220458bdbc220a3f1017b65d9138e5121a9c63decc89550a2e64e914013d26cb93b0121029643906e277eae677134d40356dfb575a2dfbe09a18a1fd7fadfd853715a7242ffffffff0234e3e600000000001976a91410a71790c6bbc2694c74b6fee9a449a11f74123388ac444c5501000000001976a9148c9e0a9029bbce075e2b5aae90010905aa4c64b188ac00000000
489feae0e317b9255031710eadc238bb1ba3009fff0e86b303b0963e34a332b0

```
_* bitcoin-cli is not included_
<br /><br />

#### Emulated APIs as in bitcoind 0.16:
```
- estimatefee
- estimatesmartfee
- getbestblockhash
- getblock [mode 0 and mode 1]
- getblockchaininfo
- getblockcount
- getblockhash
- getblockheader [ verbose \ non verbose ]
- getrawtransaction [ non verbose only ]
- gettxout
- sendrawtransaction
```

#### Work in progress:

```
- getrawtransaction [ verbose ]
- getmempoolinfo
- getrawmempool
```


#### Requirements
- An internet connection
- **less than 500mb of disk space :-)**
- Python >= 3.5.2


#### Limitations

- May reduce privacy: if you have the entire blockchain on your own, you have to tell no one what you're looking for.
- Not fast as a full node: internet download is slower than a read from disk.
- Doesn't relay and partecipate to the network (this may change).
- Very unstable!


#### Future development
 
- Tor support
- Mempool emulation
- Zeromq emulation
- Maintenance web ui


#### Contribute

Help the development of spruned! Report bugs with the issue tracker. If you're a developer, feel free to discuss a PR.
